

## Density Wave

### Problem description
#+
#+{'figures': [{'src': 'DensityWave.png',
#+              'url': 'DensityWave.pdf'}]}
#+


This problem sets up a smooth density wave advecting with a uniform velocity
and periodic boundaries. This is probably the easiest problem for a code
which solves the Euler equations, as all the non-linear features are absent,
and the behavior is only that of the scalar conservation law $\dot \rho + u_0
\rho' = 0$. The problem is described by the following parameters:

+ sound speed: $c_s$
+ advection velocity: $u_0$
+ background density: $\rho_0$
+ wave amplitude: $\rho_1$
+ background pressure: $p_0 = \rho_0 c_s^2 / \Gamma$
+ wave-number: $k_0 = 2\pi / L$

$$ \left(\begin{array}{c} \rho(x,t) \\ p(x,t) \\ u(x,t) \end{array}\right) =
\left(\begin{array}{c} \rho_0 + \rho_1 \cos{k_0 (x - u_0 t)} \\ p_0 \\ 0 \\
\end{array}\right) $$

Because of its smoothness and simplicity, this problem is ideal for gauging
the convergence order of a scheme. Any scheme claiming to converge at order
$n$ must absolutely pass this test before any other. For the convergence
test, the problem is run for half of the domain-crossing time at resolutions
$2^n$ for $n$ between 3 and 10. Five different reference schemes are used:

1. `HLLC-PLM-MUSCL`
2. `HLLC-PLM-RK3`
3. `HLLC-WENO5-RK3`
4. `CHAR-WENO5-RK3`
5. `CHAR-WENO5-RK4`


### Performance of the schemes
#+
#+{'figures': [{'src': 'DensityWave-L1.png',
#+              'url': 'DensityWave-L1.pdf',
#+              'caption': 'L1 Error of various schemes'}]}
#+

For the formally 5th order `WENO5` reconstruction schemes, it is evident that
the truncation error introduced by the 3rd order temporal update comes to
dominate the error by resolution $64^3$. At higher resolutions, the classic 4th
order Runge-Kutta update preserves 5th order convergence. Since this problem
does not involve any non-linear waves, it is not surprising that the Godunov
scheme `HLLC-WENO5-RK3` accomplishes the same convergence order as the
characteristic decomposition scheme `CHAR-WENO5-RK3`.


| $N$  |HLLC-PLM-MUSCL|HLLC-PLM-RK3|HLLC-WENO5-RK3|CHAR-WENO5-RK3|CHAR-WENO5-RK4 |
|------|--------------|------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
|   16 |2.07 |2.27 |4.52 |4.46 |4.53 |
|   32 |2.23 |2.04 |4.42 |4.69 |4.95 |
|   64 |2.25 |2.08 |3.97 |4.33 |5.04 |
|  128 |2.27 |2.00 |3.40 |3.66 |5.04 |
|  256 |2.36 |2.01 |3.13 |3.23 |5.13 |
|  512 |2.28 |1.98 |3.04 |3.06 |5.28 |
| 1024 |2.35 |2.00 |3.01 |3.02 |5.44 |


---

## Sound Wave


### Problem description

This problem sets up a smooth and small-amplitude perturbation to create a
left-going sound wave. It is only slightly more challenging as a convergence
test than the density wave. The problem is described by the following
parameters:

+ sound speed: $c_s$
+ background density: $\rho_0$
+ background pressure: $p_0 = \rho_0 c_s^2 / \Gamma$
+ density wave amplitude: $\rho_1 = 10^{-6} \rho_0$
+ pressure wave amplitude: $p_1 = c_s^2 \rho_1$
+ velocity wave amplitude: $u_1 = c_s \rho_1 / \rho_0$
+ wave-number: $k_0 = 8\pi / L$
+ frequence: $\omega_0 = c_s k_0$

$$ \left(\begin{array}{c} \rho(x,t) \\ p(x,t) \\ u(x,t) \end{array}\right) =
\left(\begin{array}{c} \rho_0 + \rho_1 \cos{(k_0 x - \omega_0 t)} \\ p_0 + p_1
\cos{(k_0 x - \omega_0 t)} \\ u_0 + u_1 \cos{(k_0 x - \omega_0 t)} \\
\end{array}\right) $$

### Performance of the schemes
#+
#+{'figures': [{'src': 'SoundWave-L1.png',
#+              'url': 'SoundWave-L1.pdf',
#+              'caption': 'L1 Error of various schemes'}]}
#+

The need for higher temporal order is highlighted by this problem. While RK4
accomplishes 5th order convergence, there is no resolution for which RK3
converges faster than 3rd order. Notice that the error saturates at $10^{-12}$,
which is slightly larger than the roundoff error. This is because the solution
is only exact to linear order, so errors introduced at second order in $\rho_1$
are at around the $10^{-12}$ level.

| $N$  |HLLC-PLM-MUSCL|HLLC-PLM-RK3|HLLC-WENO5-RK3|CHAR-WENO5-RK3|CHAR-WENO5-RK4 |
|------|--------------|------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
|   16 |  0.81 |0.36 |  0.61 |  0.61 |  0.78|
|   32 |  2.14 |0.47 |  2.40 |  2.40 |  3.45 |
|   64 |  2.06 |2.29 |  3.39 |  3.39 |  4.85 |
|  128 |  1.75 |1.72 |  3.18 |  3.18 |  4.71 |
|  256 |  1.95 |1.69 |  3.07 |  3.07 |  3.71 |
|  512 |  2.09 |1.85 |  3.12 |  3.12 |  0.23 |
| 1024 |  2.13 |1.95 |  2.08 |  2.08 |  0.01 |

---

## One dimensional two-state problems

The two-state problems in this section demonstrate the `Mara`'s shock-capturing
capability. Each problem sets up a piecewise-constant initial data, defined by a
different pressure, density, and velocity to either side of the midpoint of the
domain at $x=0.5$. Around discontinuities, the code will not converge at higher
order. Instead, we expect better schemes to introduce a smaller degree of
numerical dissipation around the discontinuity.

These problems show the solution as generated by a reference scheme,
`HLLC-PLM-RK3` on 128 grid points, compared against the exact
solution. [The exact Riemann solver for the Euler equation][1] is implemented
according to the algorithm of Toro (1997).

[1]: https://github.com/jzrake/ctf/blob/fd5d576ad7af8cd3d5f0e295d274e7390f039ff6/fish/riemann.c#L352


### Shocktube1
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'Shocktube1.png', 'url':'Shocktube1.pdf'}]}

This is the classic Brio-Wu shocktube problem. The solution consists of a
right-going shock wave and contact discontinuity, and a left-going rarefaction
wave. This problem is not challenging, but is excellent for debugging new
schemes because the correct solution is so familiar. Things to look for:

+ The presence of post-shock oscillations- there should be none
+ Smearing of the contact- second order (and higher) schemes will capture the
  contact in 4-6 zones

|        |  $x<0.5$ |  $x>0.5$ |
|--------|----------|----------|
| $\rho$ | 1.000000 | 0.125000 |
| $p$    | 1.000000 | 0.100000 |
| $v_x$  | 0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_y$  | 0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_z$  | 0.000000 | 0.000000 |

### Shocktube2
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'Shocktube2.png', 'url':'Shocktube2.pdf'}]}

Double rarefeaction wave: in this setup, the density and pressure are the same
across the midline. The velocity is discontinuous, with both halves of the
domainmoving away from midline. This problem is helpful for finding asymmetries
in the code. It should be run on both an even and odd number of zones, to
confirm that the solution is always left-right symmetric.

|        |   $x<0.5$ |  $x>0.5$ |
|--------|-----------|----------|
| $\rho$ |  1.000000 | 1.000000 |
   | $p$ |  0.400000 | 0.400000 |
| $v_x$  | -2.000000 | 2.000000 |
| $v_y$  |  0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_z$  |  0.000000 | 0.000000 |


### Shocktube3
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'Shocktube3.png', 'url':'Shocktube3.pdf'}]}

This setup creates a strong right-going shock wave by initializing a pressure
jump of 5 orders of magnitude. The quality of the solution can be gauged by the
percentage of the true maximal density behind the shock. In the example solution
given, with $128$ zones, there are two zones which reach roughly 80% the
maximal density.

|        |     $x<0.5$ |  $x>0.5$ |
|--------|-------------|----------|
| $\rho$ |    1.000000 | 1.000000 |
| $p$    | 1000.000000 | 0.010000 |
| $v_x$  |    0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_y$  |    0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_z$  |    0.000000 | 0.000000 |

### Shocktube4
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'Shocktube4.png', 'url':'Shocktube4.pdf'}]}

This setup creates a strong left-going shock wave by initializing a pressure
jump of 4 orders of magnitude.

|        |  $x<0.5$ |    $x>0.5$ |
|--------|----------|------------|
| $\rho$ | 1.000000 |   1.000000 |
| $p$    | 0.010000 | 100.000000 |
| $v_x$  | 0.000000 |   0.000000 |
| $v_y$  | 0.000000 |   0.000000 |
| $v_z$  | 0.000000 |   0.000000 |

### Shocktube5
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'Shocktube5.png', 'url':'Shocktube5.pdf'}]}

This setup yields a two-shock solution by creating a colliding supersonic
flow. The velocities are adjusted so that the left shock is stationary.

|        |    $x<0.5$ |   $x>0.5$ |
|--------|------------|-----------|
| $\rho$ |   5.999240 |  5.999240 |
| $p$    | 460.894000 | 46.095000 |
| $v_x$  |  19.597500 | -6.196330 |
| $v_y$  |   0.000000 |  0.000000 |
| $v_z$  |   0.000000 |  0.000000 |

### ContactWave
#+ {'figures': [{'src': 'ContactWave.png', 'url':'ContactWave.pdf'}]}

This problem consists of only a stationary jump in the density. Since the Euler
equations do not model any diffusive processes, the jump should remain
undisturbed. However, the `HLL` riemann solver will, in fact create anomalous
diffusion across the contact. The contact wave problem is useful at verifying an
`HLLC` solver, which uses a two-state rather than a one-state approximation to
the intermediate state in order to capture the contact discontinuity.

|        |  $x<0.5$ |  $x>0.5$ |
|--------|----------|----------|
| $\rho$ | 1.000000 | 0.100000 |
| $p$    | 1.000000 | 1.000000 |
| $v_x$  | 0.000000 | 0.000000 |
| $v_y$  | 0.700000 | 0.700000 |
| $v_z$  | 0.200000 | 0.200000 |

---
